Well the NSA — that’s the National Security Agency — they didn’t exactly come calling. They had an operation at Princeton, where they hired mathematicians to attack secret codes and stuff like that. And I knew that existed. And they had a very good policy, because you could do half your time at your own mathematics, and at least half your time working on their stuff. And they paid a lot. So that was an irresistible pull. So, I went there.
 Well, how come? I got fired because, well, the Vietnam War was on, and the boss of bosses in my organization was a big fan of the war and wrote a New York Times article, a magazine section cover story, about how we would win in Vietnam. And I didn’t like that war, I thought it was stupid. And I wrote a letter to the Times, which they published, saying not everyone who works for Maxwell Taylor, if anyone remembers that name, agrees with his views. And I gave my own views…
… which were different from General Taylor’s. But in the end, nobody said anything. But then, I was 29 years old at this time, and some kid came around and said he was a stringer from Newsweek magazine and he wanted to interview me and ask what I was doing about my views. And I told him, “I’m doing mostly mathematics now, and when the war is over, then I’ll do mostly their stuff.” Then I did the only intelligent thing I’d done that day — I told my local boss that I gave that interview. And he said, “What’d you say?” And I told him what I said. And then he said, “I’ve got to call Taylor.” He called Taylor; that took 10 minutes. I was fired five minutes after that.
But it wasn’t bad
 Oh, Chern. Shiing-Shen Chern was one of the great mathematicians of the century. I had known him when I was a graduate student at Berkeley. And I had some ideas, and I brought them to him and he liked them. Together, we did this work which you can easily see up there. There it is.
 No. I mean, I could explain it to somebody.
But not many. Not many people.
Well, it did, but I’ll say about that work — it did have something to do with that, but before we get to that — that work was good mathematics. I was very happy with it; so was Chern. It even started a little sub-field that’s now flourishing. But, more interestingly, it happened to apply to physics, something we knew nothing about — at least I knew nothing about physics, and I don’t think Chern knew a heck of a lot. And about 10 years after the paper came out, a guy named Ed Witten in Princeton started applying it to string theory and people in Russia started applying it to what’s called condensed matter. Today, those things in there called Chern-Simons invariants have spread through a lot of physics. And it was amazing. We didn’t know any physics. It never occurred to me that it would be applied to physics. But that’s the thing about mathematics — you never know where it’s going to go.
God knows. But there’s a famous physicist named Eugene Wigner, and he wrote an essay on the unreasonable effectiveness of mathematics. Somehow, this mathematics, which is rooted in the real world in some sense — we learn to count, measure, that’s kind of everyone would do that — and then it flourishes on its own. But so often it comes back to save the day. General relativity is an example. Hermann Minkowski had this geometry, and Einstein realized, “Hey! It’s the very thing in which I can cast general relativity.” So, you never know. It is a mystery. It is a mystery.
Well, that’s a ball — it’s a sphere, and it has a lattice around it — you know, those squares. What I’m going to show here was originally observed by Leonhard Euler, the great mathematician, in the 1700s. And it gradually grew to be a very important field in mathematics: algebraic topology, geometry. And that paper up there had its roots in this. So, here’s this thing: it has eight vertices, 12 edges, and six faces. And if you look at the difference — vertices minus edges plus faces — you get two. Okay, well, two. That’s a good number. Here’s a different way of doing it — these are triangles covering — this has 12 vertices and 30 edges and 20 faces, 20 tiles. And vertices minus edges plus faces still equals two. And in fact, you could do this any which way — cover this thing with all kinds of polygons and triangles and mix them up. And you take vertices minus edges plus faces — you’ll get two.
Now here’s a different shape. This is a torus, or the surface of a doughnut: 16 vertices covered by these rectangles, 32 edges, 16 faces. Vertices minus edges comes out to be zero. It’ll always come out to zero. Every time you cover a torus with squares or triangles or anything like that, you’re going to get zero. So, this is called the Euler characteristic. And it’s what’s called a topological invariant. It’s pretty amazing. No matter how you do it, you’re always going to get the same answer. So that was the first sort of thrust, from the mid-1700s, into a subject which is now called algebraic topology.
Yes. Well, there were already higher-dimensional invariants: Pontryagin classes — actually, there were Chern classes. There were a bunch of these types of invariants. I was struggling to work on one of them and model it sort of combinatorially, instead of the way it was typically done, and that led to this work and we uncovered some new things. But if it wasn’t for Mr. Euler — who wrote almost 70 volumes of mathematics and had 13 children, who he apparently would dandle on his knee while he was writing — if it wasn’t for Mr. Euler, there wouldn’t perhaps be these invariants.
I did it by assembling a wonderful group of people. When I started doing trading, I had gotten a little tired of mathematics. I was in my late 30s, I had a little money. I started trading and it went very well. I made quite a lot of money with pure luck. I mean, I think it was pure luck. It certainly wasn’t mathematical modeling. But in looking at the data, after a while I realized: it looks like there’s some structure here. And I hired a few mathematicians, and we started making some models — just the kind of thing we did back at IDA [Institute for Defense Analyses]. You design an algorithm, you test it out on a computer. Does it work? Doesn’t it work? And so on.
Well it turns out – in the old days – this is kind of a graph from the old days, commodities or currencies had a tendency to trend. Not necessarily the very light trend you see here, but trending in periods. And if you decided, okay, I’m going to predict today, by the average move in the past 20 days — maybe that would be a good prediction, and I’d make some money. And in fact, years ago, such a system would work — not beautifully, but it would work. You’d make money, you’d lose money, you’d make money. But this is a year’s worth of days, and you’d make a little money during that period. It’s a very vestigial system.
Sure, you would try all those things and see what worked best. Trend-following would have been great in the ’60s, and it was sort of okay in the ’70s. By the ’80s, it wasn’t.
We stayed ahead of the pack by finding other approaches — shorter-term approaches to some extent. The real thing was to gather a tremendous amount of data — and we had to get it by hand in the early days. We went down to the Federal Reserve and copied interest rate histories and stuff like that, because it didn’t exist on computers. We got a lot of data. And very smart people — that was the key. I didn’t really know how to hire people to do fundamental trading. I had hired a few — some made money, some didn’t make money. I couldn’t make a business out of that. But I did know how to hire scientists, because I have some taste in that department. So, that’s what we did. And gradually these models got better and better, and better and better.
Yes, length of dresses we didn’t try.
Well, everything. Everything is grist for the mill — except hem lengths. Weather, annual reports, quarterly reports, historic data itself, volumes, you name it. Whatever there is. We take in terabytes of data a day. And store it away and massage it and get it ready for analysis. You’re looking for anomalies. You’re looking for — like you said, the efficient market hypothesis is not correct.
Well any one anomaly might be a random thing; however, if you have enough data you can tell that it’s not. You can see an anomaly that’s persistent for a sufficiently long time — the probability of it being random is not high. But these things fade after a while; anomalies can get washed out. So you have to keep on top of the business.
I think in the last three or four years, hedge funds have not done especially well. We’ve done dandy, but the hedge fund industry as a whole has not done so wonderfully. The stock market has been on a roll, going up as everybody knows, and price-earnings ratios have grown. So an awful lot of the wealth that’s been created in the last — let’s say, five or six years — has not been created by hedge funds. People would ask me, “What’s a hedge fund?” And I’d say, “One and 20.” Which means — now it’s two and 20 — it’s two percent fixed fee and 20 percent of profits. Hedge funds are all different kinds of creatures.
We charged the highest fees in the world at one time. Five and 44, that’s what we charge.
We made good returns, yes. People got very mad: “How can you charge such high fees?” I said, “Okay, you can withdraw.” But “How can I get more?” was what people were — But at a certain point, as I think I told you, we bought out all the investors because there’s a capacity to the fund.
Well, it’s not just mathematical. We hire astronomers and physicists and things like that. I don’t think we should worry about it too much. It’s still a pretty small industry. And in fact, bringing science into the investing world has improved that world. It’s reduced volatility. It’s increased liquidity. Spreads are narrower because people are trading that kind of stuff. So I’m not too worried about Einstein going off and starting a hedge fund.
Well, we are. Marilyn started — there she is up there, my beautiful wife — she started the foundation about 20 years ago. I think ’94. I claim it was ’93, she says it was ’94, but it was one of those two years. We started the foundation, just as a convenient way to give charity. She kept the books, and so on. We did not have a vision at that time, but gradually a vision emerged — which was to focus on math and science, to focus on basic research. And that’s what we’ve done. Six years ago or so, I left Renaissance and went to work at the foundation. So that’s what we do.
Yeah — instead of beating up the bad teachers, which has created morale problems all through the educational community, in particular in math and science, we focus on celebrating the good ones and giving them status. Yeah, we give them extra money, 15,000 dollars a year. We have 800 math and science teachers in New York City in public schools today, as part of a core. There’s a great morale among them. They’re staying in the field. Next year, it’ll be 1,000 and that’ll be 10 percent of the math and science teachers in New York public schools.
Well, I’ll save that for a second. And then I’ll tell you what you’re looking at. Origins of life is a fascinating question. How did we get here? Well, there are two questions: One is, what is the route from geology to biology — how did we get here? And the other question is, what did we start with? What material, if any, did we have to work with on this route? Those are two very, very interesting questions.
The first question is a tortuous path from geology up to RNA or something like that — how did that all work? And the other, what do we have to work with? Well, more than we think. So what’s pictured there is a star in formation. Now, every year in our Milky Way, which has 100 billion stars, about two new stars are created. Don’t ask me how, but they’re created. And it takes them about a million years to settle out. So, in steady state, there are about two million stars in formation at any time. That one is somewhere along this settling-down period. And there’s all this crap sort of circling around it, dust and stuff. And it’ll form probably a solar system, or whatever it forms.
But here’s the thing — in this dust that surrounds a forming star have been found, now, significant organic molecules. Molecules not just like methane, but formaldehyde and cyanide — things that are the building blocks — the seeds, if you will — of life. So, that may be typical. And it may be typical that planets around the universe start off with some of these basic building blocks. Now does that mean there’s going to be life all around? Maybe. But it’s a question of how tortuous this path is from those frail beginnings, those seeds, all the way to life. And most of those seeds will fall on fallow planets.
Would love to see. And like to know — if that path is tortuous enough, and so improbable, that no matter what you start with, we could be a singularity. But on the other hand, given all this organic dust that’s floating around, we could have lots of friends out there. It’d be great to know
Well, math certainly works. Math certainly works. But this has been fun. Working with Marilyn and giving it away has been very enjoyable.
My father had made a little bit of money, and I had the opportunity to try investing it. And that was interesting. And I thought, you know, I’m going to try another career altogether, and so I went into the money management business, so to speak.
Yes, some family money, and then some other people put up some money. And I did that. No models. No models for the first two years.
Like normal people do. And I brought in a couple people to work with me, and we were extremely successful. I think it was just plain good luck, but nonetheless we were very successful. But I could see this was a very gut-wrenching business. You know you come in one morning, you think you’re a genius. The markets are for you. We were trading currencies and commodities and financial instruments and so on, not stocks, but those kinds of things. And the next morning you come in, you feel like a jerk. The markets are against you. It was very gut-wrenching. And in looking at the patterns of prices, I could see that there was something you could study here, that there were maybe some ways to predict prices, mathematically and statistically. And I started working on that, and then brought in some other people. And gradually, we built models. And the models got better and better and finally the models replaced the fundamental stuff. So it took awhile.
Well two things. I saw it pretty early, but, and I brought in a guy from the code cracking place. And he was, I thought, together we’ll start building models. That was fairly early. But it wasn’t right away. But he got more interested in the fundamental stuff. And he says, “the models aren’t going to be very strong,” and so on and so forth. So we didn’t get very far. But I knew there were models to be made. Then I brought in another mathematician, and a couple more, and a better computer guy. And then we started making models which really worked. But you know, the general, there’s something called the efficient market theory which says that there’s nothing in the data, let’s say price data, which will indicate anything about the future, because the price is sort of always right, the price is always right in some sense. But that’s just not true. So there are anomalies in the data. Even in the price history data. For one thing, commodities especially, used to trend. Not dramatically trend, but trend. So if you could get the trend right, you’d bet on the trend. And you’d make money more often than you wouldn’t, whether it was going down or going up. That was an anomaly in the data. But gradually we found more and more and more and more anomalies. None of them is so overwhelming that you’re going to clean up on a particular anomaly. Because if they were, other people would have seen them, so they have to be subtle things. And you put together a collection of these subtle anomalies and you begin to get something that will predict pretty well.
Well the system as it is today is extraordinarily elaborate. But it’s not a whole lot of, you know it’s, it’s what’s called machine learning. So you find things that are predictive. You might guess, oh, such and such should be predictive, might be predictive, and you test it out on the computer and maybe it is and maybe it isn’t. You test it out on long-term historical data, and price data, and other things. And then you add to the system, this, if it works and if it doesn’t you throw it out. So there aren’t elaborate equations, at least not for the prediction part, but the prediction part is not the only part. You have to know what you’re costs are when you trade. You’re going to move the market when you trade. Now the average person can buy 200 shares of something, and he’s not going to move the market at all because he’s too small. But if you want to buy 200,000 shares you’re going to push the price. How much are you going to push the price? How are you going to, you know, are you going to push it so far that you can’t make any money because you’ve distorted things so much? So you have to understand costs, and that’s something that’s important. And then you have to understand how to minimize the volatility of the whole, of the whole assembly of positions that you have, and be, so you have to do that. That last part takes some fairly sophisticated applied mathematics, not earth-shattering, but fairly sophisticated.
It’s mostly statistics. It’s mostly statistics and some probability theory. And, but, I can’t get into what things we do use, and what things we don’t use. We reach for different things that come, that might be effective. So we’re very universal, we don’t have any, but it’s a big computer model. For one thing there is a capacity to the major model. It can manage a certain amount of money, which is rather large. But it can’t manage an enormous amount of money because you’re pushing, you’re going to end up pushing the market around too much, so it was kind of a sweet spot as to how much it’s reasonable to manage. Therefore it would never grow into some behemoth, which would, you know, take everybody out and you’d be the only player. I mean, well of course, if you were the only player there would be no one to play against. There are limitations, at least the way we see it. But we keep improving it. We have about 100 PhDs working for the firm.
We just hired smart people. My algorithm has always been, you get smart people together. You give them a lot of freedom. Create an atmosphere where everyone talks to everyone else. They’re not hiding in a corner with their own little thing. They talk to everybody else. And you provide the best infrastructure, the best computers and so on that people can work with. And make everyone partners. So that was the model that we used in Renaissance. So we would bring in smart folks and they didn’t know anything about finance, but they learned.
Well, I'm pleased to do it. And fire away.
Well, my current title is Chairman of the Simons Foundation. That's my only title. I was Chairman of Renaissance Technologies until a year ago, but then my son took it over, but I'm still on the board. That was a hedge fund business that I founded. And was a great success.
Right. Well, we support Cold Spring Harbor, MIT, Rockefeller University, IHES in France, MSRI in California, and let's see, what am I missing? I'm on the board of Rockefeller— Oh, and the Institute for Advanced Study. I'm on the board of Rockefeller. I'm a life member of the MIT board. Same thing with IAS, the Institute for Advanced Study. I used to be on the Brookhaven board, but I just dropped off that because I wasn't getting to any meetings. And my wife is chair of the Cold Spring Harbor board. And I may have missed a few boards that I'm on, but that's enough.
Yeah, pretty well. I come into the office, and I'm in the office now, at the Foundation, but most people are working from home. But I like to come into the office, and so I'll be glad when everyone's coming in and all of our meetings can be in person and so on, but Zoom is fine and it has some advantages.
Well, they're both of Russian ancestry. But were born in the United States. My father was born in '05. He was one of ten children. And they came from Russia in 1900, already having some children. And my mother was born in 1914. Her father came from Russia when he was 13 years old, so that, well, was a while before. And that was her father. And her mother, my grandmother on that side, was born in the United States, but her ancestors, I'm pretty sure, were Russian. Russian Jews, they're all Russian Jews.
It is. The original name was Sutzkever. And Sutzkever actually, he's a very famous Yiddish poet. I haven't met him, but the name Sutzkever came from the following. There was a town in I don't know Lithuania or Poland or somewhere where they spoke Russian, anyway, and Prince Radziwill bought a bunch of land and wanted some families to come and run the land, and it was in the town of Sutzkavo. So four or five families came, one of which was my ancestors, and that was a time when people were just getting last names. So they were in the town of Sutzkavo, so Sutzkever, which must mean "from Sutzkavo" or something like that. So that was the original name. When they came to America, they wanted a nice American name, so they reached back and there was a Shimon in their ancestry, so they tried Simons, and that worked.
So yeah, worked.
My mother's family was very secular. When I was bar mitzvahed, my grandfather said it was the first time he was in synagogue since he left Russia. But I think my father's family kept kosher, they were reasonably religious, but he got away from kosher. He would go to synagogue on the high holidays and so on, but he wasn't a terribly religious person. And he certainly didn't keep kosher.
Boston. Both parents were born in Boston, and I grew up in the town of Brookline, which is right next door to Boston. And that's where I was born, and lived there until I was 14. And then we moved from our apartment to a small house in Newton, the town right next to Brookline. And so I left Brookline High School and went to Newton High School. Both schools were very good.
No. I don't. My father was almost nine years older than my mother. I don't know how they met. He was in the film business. He worked for 20th Century Fox as a salesman. In those days, you went around to various theatres and tried to sell them whatever line 20th Century Fox was then peddling. And it was usually a group of five movies, and you had to take them all. And 20th Century Fox was lucky because they had Shirley Temple in their stable. And everyone wanted the Shirley Temple film. So they would take the costume drama or whatever, they'd take it all for Shirley Temple. So he was a salesman, and he became sales manager in the New England area, and then he made a mistake. He went to work for my mother's father, who had a shoe factory. And the shoe factory was quite a successful enterprise, and he was promised a piece of the business and so on, but what he didn't realize was that while my grandfather made a lot of money he spent a lot of money on horses and women. So my father never got a piece of that business, and he didn't especially like working for his father-in-law, but he stuck with it. And so he was in the shoe business in his late years.
My mother went through high school and then she went to, I think, finishing school or something like that. My father finished eighth grade. That was all. He told me he started going to night school, but he was working full time and he kept falling asleep at the desk, so he dropped out of night school. But they were both intelligent people, and you know, in those days a lot of people didn't go beyond high school anyway. So that was that.
Well, not of my ancestors, but one of my first cousins was a very good physicist until he started working for Renaissance. So he was a full professor at University of Virginia. He was a well-known experimental physicist. And he was a very smart guy. So that's the only relative I have I think that had some mathematical leaning. So, but my parents or grandparents, no.
Well, all parents think their kids are a genius, so (laughs) so, but I did get involved with math very early. I loved to keep multiplying by two and see... I finally got up to whatever it is, 1,024, I guess? And so I liked to do that. I remember I was in the car with my father when I was maybe four or five at the most, and he said he had to stop to get gas, and I said, "Why do you have to do that?" And he said, "Well, we could run out of gas if I don't stop." And I said to myself and then to him, "Well, you don't have to run out of gas. You can use half of what you have, and then you can use half of that and then half of that, and you'll never run out of gas." (both laugh) Well, it didn't occur to me that you'd never get anywhere either, but I just kept slicing up what was in the gas tank. And I remember also spending many a night lying in bed thinking, "How do you define the expression, 'Pass it on.'" That's an expression, right? Pass it on. How do you define it? How do you explain to someone that he's supposed to say to someone, the next guy down, et cetera, that wasn't good enough. I really wanted to figure it out. And one night, I did figure it out, and then when I woke up, I forgot what it was. So (both laugh) but now I remember. But it's, you know, a strange thing for a kid to do as, I was maybe eight, to think about such a question. So I always liked math.
So he wasn't there. So I found another guy to work with. A guy named Kostant. And I wrote my thesis. It was a very good thesis, actually. It got published in the Annals, which was the best journal, one of the top journals. But my second year— and I did that in two years— but the beginning of my second year, I was giving a seminar and this tall Chinese guy walked in, and I said to the guy next to me, "Who's that?" He said, "That's Chern." I had never realized he was Chinese. If his name had been Chen or Chan, but it was Chern with an R. So I figured he was a Polish guy who changed his name from Chernowski to Chern or something like that. But anyway, that's how I met Chern, and we became good friends then. Well, "friends," that is, he was 20 years older than I was or more. But we did become friends and that was great.
You know what holonomy is?
Okay, there is such a thing as parallel transport. So if you have a, let's just say a two-dimensional closed surface. Doesn't have to be closed, but closed surface, with a metric on it. I.e., a positive definite inner product on the tangent space at every point. Then there's something called a connection, which allows you to move a vector, a tangent vector, parallel to itself. Okay? So think of it as... On the table, when you start here and you just move this parallel to itself, and then you keep it parallel to itself and go around in a circle, or any kind of a closed curve, and come back. Well, if you do this on the table, you're going to come back just to where you started. But if there's some curvature, that won't be the case. And so I'll show you a very simple example.
Start at the North Pole, take any tangent vector there. Slide it perpendicular to a geodesic down to the equator. Now it's tangent to the equator. Now move it 90 degrees around, keeping it tangent to the equator, and then bring it back to the north pole keeping it perpendicular to the geodesic coming down that met it. As you can see, the vector has made a 90-degree turn. More generally, if you take any point in a manifold, take all the closed curves that start and end there, parallel translate all the tangent vectors around. That turns out to be a linear operator and it's a group. It's a transformation group. It's not an abelian group, it's not a commutative group necessarily. It's just a group. So that's the holonomy group. And it's a very interesting object to study, and so a guy named Berger in France had characterized all of the holonomy groups on a Riemannian manifold that could exist. And it was a list of maybe eight. I don't remember how many. They were all Lie groups. Perhaps you know what a Lie group is, but—
Right. But they had one thing in common, that if the manifold was not a product of two other manifolds, or what is called a Symmetric Space, the holonomy group would always be transitive. In other words, you could get from one tangent vector at a point to any other tangent vector at the same point by parallel translating around an appropriate closed curve starting and ending at that point. So it was always transitive. So that was interesting. Why? Why were they all transitive? So a lot of people worked on that to try to get an intrinsic proof of this transitivity. And so I had an idea, which turned out to be related to that question, and so it was a little theorem that I proved and I showed it to my thesis advisor, and then he said, "Oh, that could maybe help with this question." And he told me the question. And I said, "Oh, that's right, maybe it could." But he said, "But don't work on that." He says, "Borel has worked on that, Singer has worked on that, a lot of people have tried to do this without success." But that has just got me fired up. And so I solved that problem and gave an intrinsic proof of transitivity.
I just did it.
I haven't the faintest idea. I didn't know what their approach was. But I algebraized it all. Turned it into something I called a holonomy system. Which was a generalization. And then proved that they would always be transitive, unless it corresponded to a symmetric space. So I don't know, I just— I had some communication with Singer. He encouraged me. And then I actually came back, Christmastime in my second year, and I met with Singer. There was a big snowstorm. Because I was stuck at a certain point, I showed him what I was up to, and I said, "I'm stuck here." And he looked at me and he said, "You're not using the fact that it's irreducible. That it's not a product of things." Oh, of course. So he helped me get through that little stumbling block. I guess I would have figured it out, but nonetheless, he was helpful. And so I was two years at Berkeley, and then I went back to MIT to teach. I was what was called a Moore Instructor, and I started to work in a very different area called minimal surfaces or minimal varieties. You know what a minimal surface is?
You have a wire and... a closed wire and the surface that spans that wire has less area than any other surface. That's a minimal surface. If you dip a wire loop into soap suds, any shaped loop, and take it out, there will be a film spanning the interior of the loop. That film has less area than any other film spanning the loop. It is called a minimal surface, and a guy named Jesse Douglas had proved in 1930 that any closed curve in 3-dimensional space, however twisted up it may be, can be spanned by a smooth minimal surface. That was called Plateau's problem, and he won the Fields medal for that. In fact, he was the world’s first Fields medalist as the medal had just been created.
So people got interested in these things, but in higher dimensions. So, okay, well, what about a two-dimensional boundary in 4-dimensional space? Could you always fill it in with some smooth 3-dimensional surface that's minimal with respect to all others? And a guy named Fred Almgren had recently proved that theorem. He went up one step. So I got very interested in this area and worked hard for over five years and proved a lot of theorems, but the pièce de résistance was when I proved you could always do this in up to ambient dimension seven. So, if you had a 5-dimensional boundary in 7-dimensional space, and you wanted to fill it in with a smooth 6-dimensional minimal surface, you could do that. I showed that that was possible right up to there, but gave a counter-example in 8-dimensional ambient space.
The counter-example was, you would take two three-dimensional spheres and look at their cross-product in 8-dimensional space. So that's a 6-dimensional object. Now draw a straight line down to the origin from every point on that object. That gives you a seven-dimensional thing with a point, like a cone. And I showed that that was minimal in that every small perturbation holding the boundary fixed had larger 7-dimensional area, but it wasn't smooth because it had a point. And a number of years later, maybe three or four or five, three Italian mathematicians working together showed that, yes, that was a genuine counter-example. Not only was the cone locally minimal with respect to its boundary, it was globally minimal – every other 7-dimensional filling had larger area. So that killed the problem. That paper, called Minimal Varieties in Riemannian Manifolds, had a lot of other good stuff as well and has had almost 1,700 citations. It keeps getting cited. And it's 50 years old!
Well, I had a very good time in my two years at Berkeley. My girlfriend went out there with me. She had been going to Wellesley and hated it, so when I went out as a graduate student, she came as an undergraduate. And well, we decided we would get married. We were living together, but you know, we thought, well maybe she'd get pregnant and we'd better get married. So we got married, that was all nice, and then one day she said, "I'm pregnant." And we were shocked. And in those days, there was pretty much nothing legal or safe that you could do about it. So we had a beautiful daughter whom I love very much. And that was all very nice. And then, well, we came back to Boston, and...
No. I liked California and I liked Berkeley, but I felt the action was on the East Coast.
And I wanted to work on the East Coast, and MIT made me a very nice offer. And so yeah. I liked Berkeley, but well, there it is.
Yes. That is where I thought my career was headed, and it's interesting. When I went back to MIT to teach, I remember sitting in the library one day, saying, "Well... I guess I'll become an assistant professor and then an associate professor and then a professor and then I'll go through life that way and then die." And it made me think maybe there are other things in the world.
Yeah. And I had that thought very early, although that didn't take me away from math at all at that point.
They didn't have what were called "postdocs." They had instructors. But it was at that same level.
But they had a certain class of instructors called Moore Instructors. That was that you got paid a little more if you were a Moore Instructor, and that's what I was. A Moore Instructor.
Sure, sure. Yeah. And but well anyway, then I was only there for one year for a variety of reasons, and then I moved over to Harvard, where I was put on a contract, the grant of a guy named Bott. And I was on Bott's contract for a year, I didn't have any teaching to do, and then they made me an assistant professor at Harvard, and I was an assistant professor there. But I really didn't like Harvard. And well, I could go on and on, but we'd better wait for the next session.

Yes. And maybe we star— I don't remember really if we started tilting toward science or not. I don't remember. But I do remember that that was— And we did the main thing that we did, is begin to study autism. That's still a big part of the foundation. It's about 20% of the foundation, is understanding autism and trying to, right now, maybe some treatments. It's a very variegated and complex condition, and so we hired a— I gave a couple grants, one of which worked out beautifully. The other two didn't work out at all. But we decided we needed somebody who knew what he was doing, making grants, so I got a search committee up, and I had Paul Nurse, who was head of Rockefeller University, on whose board I sat. And Harold Varmus, well-known guy. And I suggested a third person, Gerry Fischbach, who was just stepping down from being dean of medicine at Columbia, whom I knew slightly. So I invited him to lunch to start discussing whether he would be willing to be on the search committee. But the more we talked about it, the more excited he got. And at a certain point, I said, "Do you want this job?" And he said, "I think I do." So we disbanded the search committee, much to the relief of Nurse and Varmus. Because search committees can drag on and so on.
So this one was cut short, and Gerry came to work for us, and really showed us how to make grants and have workshops and all the rest of the things that we did. So, he was a wonderful guy. He's just retiring now, Gerry. And he was followed by someone else named Louis Reichardt. He stepped down six months ago, and we're searching for a replacement for him. And I think we found the person. But my fingers are crossed. But soon after that, we got into— Well, as I mentioned, we'd already had Math for America. And, having learned about it, Biden's platform shows the National Science Corps, that's what we're calling it, and it would be Math for America all over the United States. There would be 50,000 teachers of math and science as part of this National Science Corps. And it's a nice title, National Science Corps. Your mother would be pleased if you told her you were a member of the National Science Corps. Sounds great. So I'm hoping that Biden honors that, well, that piece of his platform. So I think that will happen. So that'll save me $25 million a year of course, because (laughs) Math for America would get absorbed by that. But nonetheless. So we brought in a guy named David Eisenbud to run math and physical science. And then a woman who's terrific to run life sciences. And 10% of it is education and outreach. And Quanta Magazine, that's been a great success. And Marilyn oversees that. And so it's all science. Science and math.
Well, Marilyn and I did this together, and she helped a lot with the infrastructure. The way it worked, I oversaw the science, she oversaw the administration of all sorts. And education and outreach, which is her baby. But I oversaw the rest of it. And then we started the Flatiron Institute. Maybe you've heard of the Flatiron Institute?
And that came about because it occurred to me that we might have collaborations. We might do something called collaborations, which were goal-driven things that would last a long time. Maybe ten years. And involved people from all over the country. Maybe even all over the world. Focused on these ideas. And we had a meeting a number of years ago of a bunch of scientists for a weekend to see, is this a good idea? And people said yes, they thought it was a good idea. If this was in place and that was in place and so on. So that sounded good to me. But when we were leaving, this woman, Ingrid Daubechies, was one of the members of the workshop, or the panel or whatever. She said, "Well maybe you should do something in data science." And that sounded reasonable to me because I had made all this money by analyzing data. In Medallion and Renaissance. So I said, "Well, that sounds like a good idea." Maybe she was hoping that we would put up an institute of data science at Duke, where she was a professor.
But I figured we could just do this right in-house. So we started with a guy named Leslie Greengard, who was a very distinguished applied mathematician, but he's also an MD, to put this up. And he hired people and they were doing great things on the biology side. And after maybe two years, I thought, well, we should generalize this idea. Maybe it was almost three years. So let's throw it at other fields. So the next field was astrophysics. We had a workshop to see if that was a good idea. Guy named David Spergel agreed to chair the workshop. And he was a terrific chair of the workshop, and so I said to myself, "Well, if we can get him to run this unit, that would be great." And it took a couple months of convincing him. So he came to us and we built up that.
Then quantum physics was something else we built up. That arose from a collaboration which we still have called Many Electrons. And it's, well, it's condensed matter physics, really, but so we started quantum physics. And again, had a wonderful person to run it. A guy named Antoine George from France. And so that was three units. And then so it was computational biology, computational astrophysics, computational quantum physics. And there was room for one more unit, and everyone, people thought, okay, computational mathematics. That would kind of be glue to hold the whole thing together. So, we started that, but Leslie, he wanted to head that. And so he stepped down and headed, and now heads computational mathematics. And one of the people in his group who was extremely good and senior took it over.
So now we had four units, and the building only held four. But everyone wanted neuroscience. We had room in our main building. A couple of empty floors. So we hired a fellow named Eero Simoncelli. He was at NYU, to run computational neuroscience. He's great. And that's just getting built up now. So the Flatiron Institute is wonderful. It's totally wonderful. I'm more proud of that than almost anything I've ever done, was to create the Flatiron Institute. Of course, Marilyn was on board with it, and we had a rehab building across the street. And it was an old building, but it was half-empty. I wanted to buy it but they wouldn't sell it to me. But they gave me a 50-year lease. So, okay, 50 year lease. But I had to rehabilitate the building and all the rest. I figured it would cost about $50 million to do that. New elevators, everything needed to be replaced. Marilyn on the other hand said, "It's going to cost $100 million." I poo-pooed her, but it did cost $98 million. (both laugh) So she was right. But it's a beautiful building, and it has a dining hall in it... And you know, you ought to come and see it sometime. It's great. So I'm very proud of that. But the foundation is great.
And I stepped away from the Renaissance at a certain point, and left it in very good hands. I still own a lot of the company. And I came to give full time to the foundation. And you know, that's a legacy, and well I hope Renaissance Technologies lasts forever too, but well there it is.
Well, it's right up there with Renaissance. Why? It's unique. There isn't anything quite like it. And luckily, I hired terrific leaders. Which is— And it's working so well. It's just working beautifully. I'm proud of it.
Absolutely. That is my— That's the way I worked. Hire the best people you possibly can and let them do their thing. And if they're smarter than you are? Great! You know? I'm sure some of the people I've hired are, you know, would do better on an IQ test than I would. But let them do their thing, and it's worked. And those people, because they have to have good taste, would build up the organization, because they do have good taste. And so that's always been my, you know, when I built up the math department at Stony Brook, that was the first time I recruited anybody. But I realized I love recruiting.
I really love recruiting. I love to go out and find smart people and come on, work for me or work with me or whatever. I like recruiting. So of course, during that period I also did the work with Chern, and so it was a very productive period.
Yes, to a certain extent. There are lectures all the time, and so on, and I meet with the group leaders every month in each of the divisions, and they tell me what they've been up to. Sometimes I understand it, much of the time I don't. But nonetheless, there it is. So yeah, I mean it's a connection with science. But the whole foundation, of course, is mostly devoted to science.
Well, we have a huge computational computer facility. And I forgot to mention that luckily two people came to work for us when it was just Leslie. He hired two people who were absolutely terrific in terms of hardware and software and getting a computing facility up. So and now this facility is enormous. I'm not sure how many cores, but it's thousands, tens of thousands of cores. We have a big facility in San Diego called Popeye, and we're just putting up a facility in New Jersey. And we have a whole basement full of computing. So those guys, it's called the Scientific Computing Core, because they support all of the units. It's about 15 people in that group, as opposed to about 50 in the regular units. But they are stupendous. And I couldn't have done it without those guys. And one of them was head of the computing for one of the two experiments at CERN. There were two experiments, you know, when they were looking for the Higgs boson.
So I asked a friend of mine who happened to be on the other experiment, "Do you know this guy?" His name was Ian Fisk. And she said, "Well, he's not on our experiment. He's on the other one. Our experiment is—" The computing was quite problematic. But she asked her friends who were in the other thing, and they said, "Well, we never had any problems." Now, that's a terrific endorsement, because you don't have any problems? You know? (both laugh) So he was tired of that already, you know the experiments had been done and so on. We visited there a couple years ago, Marilyn and I, and he would go back occasionally. Ian Fisk, just to catch up or do something, whatever. But they told me they idolized him. They just idolized this guy, Ian Fisk. So he's terrific. Particularly in hardware. And the other fellow is Nick Carriero in software. You give him a program and he'll speed it up. No matter what the program is, he'll find a way to make it faster. So we have that, and that's a key part of the institute.

